# Conflict resolution

As stated before, a conflict is a satisfied incompatibility that we detected in
the unit propagation loop. The goal of conflict resolution is to backtrack the
partial solution such that we have the following guarantees:

1. The root cause incompatibility of the conflict is almost satisfied (such that
   we can continue unit propagation).
2. The following derivations will be different than before conflict resolution.

Let the "satisfier" be the earliest assignment in the partial solution making
the incompatibility fully satisfied by the partial solution up to that point. We
know that we want to backtrack the partial solution at least previous to that
assignment. Backtracking only makes sense if done at decision levels frontiers.
As such the conflictual incompatibility can only become "almost satisfied" if
there is only one package term related to incompatibility satisfaction at the
decision level of that satisfier. When the satisfier is a decision this is
trivial since all previous assignments are of lower decision levels. When the
satisfier is a derivation however we need to check that property. We do that by
computing the "previous satisfier" decision level. The previous satisfier is (if
it exists) the earliest assignment previous to the satisfier such that the
partial solution up to that point, plus the satisfier, makes the incompatibility
satisfied. Once we found it, we know that property (1) is guaranteed as long as
we backtrack to a decision level between the one of the previous satisfier and
the one of the satisfier, as long as these are different.

If the satisfier and previous satisfier decisions levels are the same, we cannot
guarantee (1) for that incompatibility after backtracking. Therefore, the key of
conflict resolution is to derive a new incompatibility for which we will be able
to guarantee (1). And we have seen how to do that with the
[rule of resolution](incompatibilities.md#rule-of-resolution). We will derive a
new incompatibility called the "prior cause" as the resolvent of the current
incompatibility and the incompatibility which is the cause of the satisfier. If
necessary, we repeat that procedure until finding an incompatibility, called the
"root cause" for which we can guarantee that it will be almost satisfied after
backtracking (1).

Now the question is where do we cut? Is there a reason we cut at the previous
satisfier decision level? Is it to guarantee (2)? Would that not be guaranteed
if we picked another decision level? Is it because backtracking further back
will reduce the number of potential conflicts?
