# Internals of the PubGrub algorithm

For an alternative / complementary explanation of the PubGrub algorithm, you can
read the detailed description of the solver provided by the original PubGrub
author in the GitHub repository of the dart package manager [pub][pub].

PubGrub is an algorithm inspired by conflict-driven nogood learning (CDNL-ASP),
an [approach presented by Gabser, Kaufmann and Schaub in 2012][ass]. The
approach consists in iteratively taking decisions (here picking a package and
version) until reaching a conflict. At that point it records a nogood (an
"incompatibility" in PubGrub terminology) describing the root cause of the
conflict and backtracks to a state previous to the decision leading to that
conflict. CDNL has many similarities with [CDCL][cdcl] (conflict-driven clause
learning) with the difference that nogoods are conjunctions while clauses are
disjunctions of literals. More documentation of their approach is available on
[their website][potassco].

At any moment, the PubGrub algorithm holds a state composed of two things, (1) a
partial solution and (2) a set of incompatibilities. The partial solution (1) is
a chronological list of "assignments", which are either decisions taken or
version constraints for packages where no decision was made yet. The set of
incompatibilities (2) is an ever-growing collection of incompatibilities. We
will describe them in more details later but simply put, an incompatibility
describes packages that are dependent or incompatible, that is packages that
must be present at the same time or that cannot be present at the same time in
the solution.

Incompatibilities express facts, and as such are always valid. Therefore, the
set of incompatibilities is never backtracked, only growing and recording new
knowledge along the way. In contrast, the partial solution contains decisions
and deductions (called "derivations" in PubGrub terminology), that are dependent
on every decision made. Therefore, PubGrub needs to be able to backtrack the
partial solution to an older state when there is a conflict.

[pub]: https://github.com/dart-lang/pub/blob/master/doc/solver.md
[ass]: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0004370212000409
[cdcl]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Conflict-driven_clause_learning
[potassco]: https://potassco.org/book/
